+++
title = "Complex M5.1 Earthquake Rupture in Sparta, North Carolina"
+++

On August 9, 2020, a Mw5.1 earthquake ruptured the uppermost Crust near the town of Sparta, North Carolina. The earthquake ruptured a 2-km-long surface and is likely the first surface-rupturing event in the Eastern United States since the New Madrid earthquake sequence (Figueiredo et al., 2022). Following the mainshock, 5 temporary seismic stations were also deployed by scientists from CERI@Univ. Memphis (Horton et al., 2021) in the area. Together with state-of-the-art earthquake detection and relocation techniques, this sequence provides an opportunity to better understand the local fault structures and the source processes of intraplate earthquakes.

We combine a deep learning earthquake phase picker (EQTransformer, Mousavi et al., 2020) and a matched filter detection to improve the earthquake catalog for the sequence for the period of August 1 to November 18, 2020. We perform a first detection using EQTransformer that we combine with the USGS catalog to create a template catalog with 498 earthquakes. We then perform a matched filter detection and use cross-correlation derived differential-travel times to relocate the detected events. Our final catalog includes 1762 earthquakes with high-resolution locations.

Our relocated catalog shows two major lineaments that appear to illuminate two fault branches with a slight kink. These two lineaments are consistent with our focal mechanism solution using the generalized cut-and-paste (gCAP) method that shows a thrust event with some strike-slip component and a moment magnitude of 5.13 with optimal centroid depth of 1.3 km. In addition, non-DC components of about 12% imply the mainshock may have ruptured along complex fault geometries. One of our identified lineaments is consistent with surface observations of thrust faulting by Figueiredo et al. (2022) and the dip of our preferred nodal plane. Analysis of first motion polarities of all events M>1.5 shows mostly strike-slip focal mechanisms, including the mainshock. We also estimate a stress-drop of about 6 MPa, consistent with a very shallow mainshock in the Eastern US. Our results suggest that the mainshock rupture occurred primarily along a thrust fault, but initiated in a secondary blind strike-slip fault. These observations have potential implications on seismic hazard estimation in intraplate settings.